# GFF features and visualization
**Adrián Barreno Sánchez (adrian.barreno@alumnos.upm.es), Pablo Mata Aroco (p.mata@alumnos.upm.es), Alberto González Delgado (alberto.gondelgado@alumnos.upm.es), Julian Elijah Politsch (julian.politsch@alumnos.upm.es), Angelo D'Angelo (angelo.dangelo@alumnos.upm.es)**


## What is GFF features and visualization?

GFF features and visualization is a computer program designed in ruby to 

## How to run Intensive Integration?
Download the code as [README file for assignment answers](../README.md) indicates. 

## Requirements:

* [Bio-Gem](https://rubygems.org/gems/bio-gem/versions/1.3.6)
```
gem install bio-gem
```
* [CSV-gem](https://rubygems.org/gems/csv?locale=es)

```
gem install csv
```
## Usage:

To run the program, execute the following command (inside gff_features_visualization/ folder), adding the arguments recquired:

```
cd assignments_answers/gff_features_visalization/
```
```
ruby main.rb <genes_file> <output_gff_file> <output_report_file> 
```
**Arguments:**
1. **[Genes_file:](documents/ArabidopsisSubNetwork_GeneList.txt)** file that provides a list of target genes that will be used for searching for interactions and annotations.
2. **Output_gff_file**: file where the gff will be saved. Here there is an  [ouput gff file](documents/) that shows the gff file generated by the program.
3. **Output_report_file**: file where the report will be saved. Here there is an  [ouput txt file](documents/) that shows the file generated by the program.

To run the program using the files contained in [files folder](documents/), just execute the following command:
```
ruby .rb documents/ArabidopsisSubNetwork_GeneList.txt ./documents/output.txt
```
If output pathway specified already exists, the program will ask you if you want to overwrite it. Y/y (yes) or N/n (no) input is expected.



## Output
GFF file: Gff3 file containing locations of motif

final_report.txt: List of genes in your list that do not contain the motif in their exons

## References
